# Privacy Statement

In this privacy statement, we inform you about the data we collect from you
while you are browsing our website, for what purpose we store your data, and how
we use the information we record.

## Responsible Company

[Tenzir GmbH](https://tenzir.com) is responsible for gathering, processing, and
using of personal data.

## Personal Data

You can visit our website without disclosing personal information. Personal
information relates to an identified or identifiable person, such as your
contact details (postal address, email address, telephone numbers), your date of
birth, and your IP address(es).

We use your personal data only if necessary and only for a specified purpose.
The purpose may be the preparation or conclusion of a contract between you and
Tenzir and/or the use of our consulting and support services. Should you not
wish to provide personal data, you may not be able to access certain parts of
our website or we will not be able to process your request.

Without having obtained your prior consent, we will not use your data for other
purposes and not transfer your data to a third party. For learning more about
how to object to the use of your personal data, please visit the section
[Your Rights](#your-rights).

## General Data

We host this website on [GitHub Pages](https://pages.github.com). The web site
is open source and you can inspect the source code at
<https://github.com/tenzir/vast>.

By visiting this website, Github collects information (e.g., in the form of web
server log files), including your IP address, your browser type, language
preference, referring site, additional websites requested, and the date and time
of your request. Github needs this data to ensure functionality and security of
our page.

Github is Privacy Shield certified. Please consult [GitHub's Privacy
Statement](https://help.github.com/articles/github-privacy-statement/) for
further details on their privacy practices.

## Tracking

We use [Plausible](https://plausible.io/) as a lightweight and open source web
analytics solution. Plausible **does not require cookies** and is **fully compliant
with GDPR, CCPA and PECR**. Plausible is made and hosted in the EU, powered by
European-owned cloud infrastructure.

For maximum transparency, we share our analytics dashboard publicly at
<https://plausible.io/docs.tenzir.com>.

Please refer to Plausible's [data policy](https://plausible.io/data-policy) for
a complete list of collected metrics.

## Data Security & Encryption

We deploy technical (e.g., encryption technologies) and organisational measures
to ensure the security of your data and to prevent unauthorized access and
changes or loss of your data. The measures reflect the state of the art and are
reviewed and updated at regular intervals.

## Data Retention

Based on the principle of data avoidance and data economy, we retain your data
for as long as it is necessary for us to perform a service that you have
requested or for which you have granted your permission, unless legal
requirements oblige us to retain your data for a longer period (e.g., storage
periods according to trade or tax regulations).

## Your Rights

You are at any time entitled to request information on what data we store about
you and ask for rectification, deletion (entirely or partially) or blocking of
your personal data. You can object to further use of your data at any time.
Please address your concern to <info@tenzir.com>.

Should you consider the processing of your personal data as unlawful, you can
directly submit your complaint with the responsible supervisory authority,
which is the Hamburg representative for data protection and freedom of
information.

## Updates & Changes

The continuous development of legal requirements and technical or
organisational measures renders it necessary for us to apply changes in this
privacy statement from time to time. We reserve all rights to do so at any
time. Hence, we kindly ask you to read this privacy statement before using our
service.
